ELECTRONIC NOSE FOR MANGO LEAF DISEASE DETECTION USING ESP32
Project Overview
This project is an Electronic Nose (E-Nose) system developed to detect mango leaf diseases by sensing the Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) released by diseased leaves.
Instead of using image processing, this project detects the gases released from infected leaves using gas sensors. The sensor readings are collected and stored as a dataset, which can later be used for machine learning to classify healthy and diseased leaves.
Objective
The main objective of this project is to:
• Detect VOCs released by diseased mango leaves. 
• Collect a clean sensor dataset. 
• Build a machine learning dataset for disease classification. 
• Develop a low-cost portable Electronic Nose system. 
Hardware Components
• ESP32 Development Board 
• MQ3 Gas Sensor 
• MQ135 Gas Sensor 
• Mini Air Pump 
• Two Airtight Containers 
o Leaf Chamber 
o Sensor Chamber 
• Silicone Tube 
• 12V Battery 
• Rocker Switch 
• USB Cable 
• Laptop 
Software Used
• Arduino IDE 
• ESP32 Board Package 
• CoolTerm 
• Microsoft Excel 
• Python (for Machine Learning) 
Working Principle
The Electronic Nose works by detecting gases released from diseased mango leaves.
The setup contains two separate chambers.
The first chamber contains the mango leaf.
The second chamber contains the MQ3 and MQ135 gas sensors.
Both chambers are connected using a silicone tube.
A small pump is used to transfer the VOCs released from the leaf chamber into the sensor chamber.
The ESP32 continuously reads the analog values from both sensors and stores them in CSV format.
Dataset Collection Procedure
The dataset was collected using the following procedure.
Step 1
Power ON the ESP32.
Step 2
Allow the gas sensors to warm up for approximately 30 minutes before collecting the first sample.
Step 3
Wait until the sensor readings become stable.
Step 4
The ESP32 measures the baseline values by taking multiple readings in fresh air.
Step 5
Place the diseased mango leaf inside the leaf chamber.
Step 6
Close both chambers.
Step 7
Turn ON the air pump manually using the rocker switch.
The pump transfers VOCs from the leaf chamber to the sensor chamber.
Step 8
Wait for 15 minutes.
This allows enough VOC concentration to build inside the sensor chamber.
Step 9
The ESP32 records the sensor readings automatically for one minute.
Step 10
The collected readings are stored in CSV format using CoolTerm.
Step 11
Turn OFF the pump.
Step 12
Remove the leaf.
Step 13
Open both chambers and allow fresh air to circulate until the sensors return close to their baseline values.
Step 14
Repeat the process for the next sample.
CSV Dataset Format
Each collected sample is stored in CSV format.
Example:
Time,Sample,Label,Baseline_MQ3,Baseline_MQ135,MQ3,MQ135
0,D01,Diseased,324,53,561,82
1,D01,Diseased,324,53,563,81
2,D01,Diseased,324,53,565,84
Sensor Description
MQ3
The MQ3 sensor detects alcohol and various volatile organic compounds released by infected leaves.
MQ135
The MQ135 sensor detects gases such as ammonia, benzene, smoke, carbon dioxide, and other air pollutants.
Combining both sensors provides better information about the VOC profile released by diseased leaves.
Why Baseline Measurement?
The baseline value changes slightly because environmental conditions are never exactly the same.
Measuring the baseline before every sample helps reduce the effect of environmental changes and makes each sample more reliable.
Why Two Chambers?
Using separate chambers provides several advantages.
• Prevents moisture from reaching the sensors. 
• Reduces contamination. 
• Improves VOC transfer. 
• Produces more consistent sensor readings.

